Thanks everyone for joining my masters seminar. Today I am going to talk about the Finite Element Analysis of multi-dimensional and simplified models for beams. My masters also handles the case of plate models, but in this presentation we will be focusing just on beams.

Beams are fundamental structural elements in engineering. They are used in a wide variety of applications, bridges, buildings, even the international space station.

Simplified model are often used in vibration problems of beams. This is due to the reduced complexity and computational demand compared to a more realistic, higher dimensional model. However the accuracy of these simplified models in practical applications are not always certain. And in this presentation we'll look at one of the major factors that can influence how well these models compare.

In this presentation, we look at the validity of a Timoshenko cantilever beam model as well as the validity of a two-dimensional cantilever beam. The term validity in this case refers to how well the solution compares to the solution of a more realistic higher dimensional model. For our most realistic model, we will be considering a three-dimensional cantilever beam model. 

So in this presentation, we will use modal analysis and the Finite Element Method to compare the models' natural frequencies and mode shapes, to determine their validity. 

The layout of the presentation is as follows. First well discuss some theory. We start by looking at a general vibration problem. Then we look at the well posedness of our models. Critical to the methodology to compare the models, we'll look at modal analysis for a general case. We will not go into too much detail into the theory as this presentation will focus more in the numerical results.

Then we present the three models that we are using in this presentation. We have a Timoshenko cantilever beam, a two-dimensional cantilever beam and a three-dimensional cantilever beam. 

We the look at two literature studies that investigates the validity of the models. Firstly, we look at an article that compares a cantilever Timoshenko beam to a cantilever two-dimensional beam. This is also the first case that we will look at in the numerical results. Then we look at an article that compares the theoretical results of a Timoshenko beam, to a real world empirical study.

Finally we look at some numerical results. We use the Finite Element Method to solve the eigenvalue problems for each of the models and then we compare the solutions for different shapes of cantilever beams.

Before we can look at the theory, we first need to define some Hilbert spaces. Let V, W and X be real Hilbert spaces such that W is a linear subspace of X, and V is a linear subspace of W. Here X is referred to as the global space, W is the inertia space and V is the energy space, each with their own inner product and induced norm. These inner products also define bilinear forms, called a, b and c where a is the inner product of X, b is the inner product of V and c is the inner product of W.
Now we look at a general form of a vibration problem. In this problem, we need to find a u in the space C, such that u' is continuous at 0 with respect to a norm || ||w and for some values of t, with u in V, u' in V and u'' in W satisfying this equation 1. This general vibration problem is presented in the article cited below.
All of the problems in this presentation are second order hyperbolic type problems. And each can be written in this general form. Our models do not include strong damping, therefore the bilinear form a is eidetically zero.

In the article Analysis of the Solvability of Linear Vibration Models, the authors present results for the existence and uniqueness of soltuions to the general vibration problem. The follow 4 assumptions are made by the authors:
A1 - V is dense un W and W is dense in X.
A2 - There exists a positive constant C_W such that.........
A3 - There exists a positive constant C_W such that.........
A4 - The bilinear form a is non-negative symmetric and bounded on V. This is automatically satisfied for our models since they do not have strong damping and hence a is eidetically zero.

If these 4 assumptions can be proved, then the follow result holds:
This theorem proves the existence and uniqueness of solutions for the general vibration problem. For our models, if all four assumptions can be proved, then our models are well posed. We will not go deeper into this, as again we are only focusing on the numerical results.

Now we look at modal analysis. This is an important result that will enable us to compare our models. So consider the general vibration problem again. This time with a = 0 and no external force.

Consider a trial solution for the general vibration problem, u(t) = T(t)x with x in V and x non zero. If we substitute our trial solution into our equation, we get the following. Now due to the linearity of the bilinear forms, the T(t) can come out and dividing by both sides gives us the following relation.

THis means that T''(t)/T(t) must be constant. So set this value equal to some number lambda. At this point we do not yet know if such a lambda exists. So we obtain the following eigenvalue problem as well as a ordinary differential equation. 